Whiteness and Farmers Markets:
Performances,
Perpetuations ... Contestations?
Alison Hope Alkon
Department of Sociology, University of the Pacific, California, USA;
aalkon@pacific.edu
Christie Grace McCullen
Department of Sociology, University of California Santa Cruz, USA;
christie_mccullen@yahoo.com
Abstract: Academics and activists highlight the potential for alternative agrifood movements
to contribute to the evolving coalescence of justice and sustainability. This potential, however, is
constrained by what scholars have identified as the prevalent whiteness of such movements. This
paper uses ethnographic research at two northern California farmers markets to investigate how
whiteness is performed and perpetuated through the movements’ discourses and practices. We
found that many managers, vendors and customers hold notions of what farmers and community
members should be that both reflect and inform an affluent, liberal habitus of whiteness.
Although whiteness pervades these spaces, we have also witnessed individual discourses and
acts of solidarity and anti-racism, as well as fledgling institutional efforts to contest white
cultural dominance. We conclude by discussing the potential of farmers markets to create an
anti-racist politics of food.
Keywords: alternative agrifood movement, environmental justice, farmers markets, imaginary,
sustainability, whiteness
Introduction
Academics and activists have struggled to conceptualize and create what
Julian Agyeman (2005) has productively termed “just sustainability”.
In the context of increasing environmental degradation and growing
disparities in wealth, this concept, which emphasizes both the
sustainable use of resources and the just distribution of environmental
risks and benefits, becomes increasingly important. Just sustainability
is reflected not only in a flurry of recent scholarly activity on the
intersections of environment with race (see, for example, Pellow 2002;
Pulido 1996; Sze 2006), class (Gould, Lewis and Timmons Roberts
2004; Obach 2004), and social justice (Gottlieb 2001; Pinderhughes
Antipode V ol. 43 No. 4 2011 ISSN 0066-4812, pp 937–959
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
938 Antipode
2007), but in activist campaigns to ensure that green economic growth
will create benefits for racially and economically marginalized people
(Jones 2008).
Several of these works look to alternative agrifood systems—-an
umbrella term encompassing a range of organic, local and fair trade
imperatives—-as a potential engine of just sustainability (Agyeman
and Evans 2004; Gottlieb 2001; Pinderhughes 2003). While US
environmentalism has historically been dominated by efforts to preserve
landscapes and species threatened by humans (Cronon 1995; Gottlieb
2001), both alternative agrifood movements and the environmental
justice efforts of low-income communities of color stress the connection
between humans and nature (DiChiro 1996; Taylor 2000). One great
claim of alternative agrifood movements is that defetishizing food—
that is, revealing the social and environmental relationships that make
its production and distribution possible—will animate both consumer
and political demands for ecologically sustainable and socially just food
production. For this reason, alternative agrifood systems may have an
important role to play in the formation of just sustainability.
As the most prevalent and public institution within alternative
agrifood systems, farmers markets1 provide an important standpoint
from which to examine the everyday discourses and practices that fulfill
the movement’s vision. The number of farmers markets in the USA has
grown exponentially in the past few decades; they exist in all 50 states
and most major cities host numerous markets throughout the week (US
Department of Agriculture 2006).
Despite their noted potential to create just sustainability, scholars have
argued that farmers markets, and the alternative agrifood movement
more generally, contain whitened discourses and practices (Guthman
2008a, 2008b; Slocum 2007)2. This whiteness refers not only to the
clustering of pale bodies in farmers markets and other movement spaces
(Saldanha 2006; Slocum 2007, 2008), but also suggests that such spaces
are shaped by a set of white cultural practices (Frankenberg 1993;
Guthman 2008a, 2008b; Kobayashi and Peake 2000). This whiteness can
inhibit the participation of people of color in alternative food systems,
and can constrain the ability of those food systems to meaningfully
address inequality. Thus, such whiteness may prevent alternative food
movements, despite their growing popularity, from contributing to a just
sustainability that can transform existing social, material and ecological
relations.
In this paper, we seek to illuminate the discourses and practices
through which whiteness becomes ingrained in two northern California
farmers markets that resonate closely with the alternative agrifood
movement. Our research revealed two imaginaries—-sets of values and
symbols that shape the discourses and practices of a social group. In
what we call the white farm imaginary, market participants valorize
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 939
the predominantly white vendors who “grow their food”, rendering
invisible the low-paid, predominantly Latino/a workers who do the bulk
of the cultivation. Customers draw upon the complimentary community
imaginary to depict themselves, as well as their friends and neighbors,
as ethically motivated supporters of struggling family farmers. Many
managers, vendors and customers unwittingly draw upon the community
imaginary to justify or obscure the structural barriers that prevent
the participation of low-income people and people of color. As we
will demonstrate below, both narratives not only reveal white cultural
dominance, but a particularly patterned set of thoughts, behaviors and
tastes that we refer to as an affluent, liberal habitus of whiteness.3
Our findings suggest that the dispositions and skills that allow an
individual to feel politically empowered by the buying and selling of
local organic food, as well as socially accepted as part of the farmers
market community, reflect this intersection of race, class and political
orientation. Thus, farmers markets such as our cases become inclusive,
empowering spaces for a form of food politics that reflects liberal,
affluent, white identities and positionalities.
However, in addition to this pervasive affluent whiteness, we have
also observed statements and acts of solidarity and anti-racism. These
discourses and practices exist alongside, rather than in direct opposition
to, the narratives described above. By attending to both constructions and
contestations of affluent whiteness, our empathetic critique synthesizes
Slocum’s (2007:522) dictate to follow existing strategies and see where
they go and Guthman’s desire to push the movement in a more
emancipatory direction. Thus we are neither completely dismissive nor
completely laudatory of farmers markets’ abilities to contribute to just
sustainability, but recognize that any potential contribution requires that
market participants recognize and confront the liberal, elite whiteness
that pervades their discourses and practices.
Conceptualizing Whiteness in Alternative Agriculture
Until recently, most academic literature about alternative agrifood
movements echoed proponents’ sentiments and validated its leaders’
assertions (Lyson 2004; Kloppenburg, Hendrickson and Stevenson
1996). These scholars, as well as numerous popular writers (Berry 2002;
McKibben 2007; Pollan 2006), praise the politically transformative
potential of alternative foods and of sustained relationships between
producers and consumers. Key to their argument is the notion of
defetishization. Conventional agriculture, they argue, hides the socially
and environmentally harmful processes through which food is produced.
Accordingly, lifting the veil on those processes, or, in the clich´e adopted
by alternative agrifood movement participants, “knowing where your
food comes from”, will improve those social and ecological relations.
This logic resonates with studies concluding that connecting producers
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

940 Antipode
and consumers can shape more ethical relations (Gilbert 1988; Hartwick
2000). Somewhat conversely, but motivated by similar aims, some
scholars of Fair Trade efforts argue that by embracing the fetishized
ideal of warm relations between producers and consumers, actors can
reimagine and begin to build a socially just and ecologically sustainable
network of food distribution (Goodman 2004; Hughes 2005). In this
paper, we discuss the promises and pitfalls of both defetishizing and
refetishizing food production in farmers markets.
Beyond debates of fetishism, some scholars critique alternative
agrifood systems for their exclusivity and lack of wide-scale impact.
Several have argued that in order to create a just and sustainable
society, alternative agriculture movements must challenge conventional
agriculture rather than merely provide alternative niches (Allen 2004;
Buttel 1997; Magdoff, Foster and Buttel 2000). Alternative markets,
these authors argue, reinforce the neoliberal prescription to address
social problems through market-exchange relations (Guthman 2008c),
and allow affluent consumers to substitute individual purchasing
decisions for sustained collective action (Szasz 2007).
One vein of critical agrifood scholarship argues that the movement’s
ability to create political transformation is hampered by its complicity
with whiteness. Whites comprise the overwhelming majority of
California’s organic farmers (Allen 2004), and tend to dominate farmers
markets (Payne 2002) and community supported agriculture programs
(Hinrichs 2000). Using Saldanha’s (2006) idea of viscosity, Slocum
(2007) claims that when white bodies cluster around property and
privilege, as happens in farmers markets, they can code these spaces
as white, creating what Kobayashi and Peake (2000) term a “racialized
space”. This runs contrary to the popular belief among farmers market
managers that markets are culturally neutral.
The whiteness we observe at farmer markets is about more than just
the presence of pale-skinned bodies. According to Ruth Frankenberg’s
foundational work, whiteness “carries with it a set of ways of being
in the world, a set of cultural practices often not named as ‘white’
by white folks, but looked upon instead as ‘American’ or ‘normal’”
(Frankenberg 1993:4). However, building on Nayak’s (2006) critique of
Frankenberg’s writing, we conceptualize whiteness not as a consistent,
essentialized identity, but as existing in multiple forms. The whiteness
we see in our cases is not the working class performances of “god, guns
and country” that fill the rhetoric of the GOP. Indeed, we suspect that
this kind of white, conservative, working class4 discourse may cohere
with conventional agribusiness.5 Nor is what we observed the whiteness
of elite country clubs that deliberately attempt to maintain the formal or
informal exclusion of non-whites.
On the contrary, the farmers markets we studied reflect an affluent,
liberal habitus of whiteness. This whiteness is affluent in that it requires
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 941
comfort with expensive products such as gourmet foods and politically
liberal in its regard for environmental concerns and cultural diversity.
Through this habitus, and the social practices that follow from it, those
we studied signaled their privileged social locations and beliefs to
one another. In these farmers markets, affluence and liberal political
orientation shape whiteness, but whiteness is not reducible to class
or politics. The imaginaries we analyze below reveal a particularly
affluent, liberal variant of whiteness. Thus, our research suggests that it
is not only oppressions, but also privileges that merit an intersectional
(Collins 1990) approach that views race as constructed through class
and vice versa.6 Such an approach reflects the complex, multi-
dimensional, mutually constructed and irreducible social locations that
shape subjectivities and practices. We argue that an intersectional
analysis of affluent, liberal whiteness in farmers markets can contribute
to an understanding of why participants tend to defetishize how food is
produced but not who produces it.
To unpack the racialized and class-inflected narratives at play in
farmers markets is to extend the alternative agriculture movement’s
strategic rupturing of the veil of commodity fetishism to include
the systemic inequalities on which both conventional and alternative
agriculture depend (Cook, Crang and Thorpe 2004). Our observations
reveal fledgling and partial attempts by market managers, vendors
and customers to do just that. Currently, these attempts are primarily
discursive, representing a desire to re-imagine the politics of food in
explicitly anti-racist and anti-classist ways.
The farmers markets we study are generally characterized by an
affluent, liberal habitus of whiteness. Recognizing this, some market
managers, vendors and customers have begun to attempt to discursively
disrupt some inequalities. However, as many scholars before us
have noted, the ultimate goal of these discursive disruptions—
the transformation of material realities—requires that the alternative
agriculture movement go beyond the politics of consumption to
sustained collective action. As public spaces in which political activity
is already present, farmers markets have the potential to act as entry
points for more progressive, politicized social movement activity.
Acknowledging the way that affluent, liberal whiteness shapes farmers
markets, as well as the structural racial and economic inequalities
embedded in the food system, can ensure that this collective action
is aimed at justice as well as sustainability.
Research Approach
Initially, each author approached her research site with a broad interest
in social justice, but no preformulated idea as to how race and class
would manifest, as is consistent with Glaser and Strauss’ (1967)
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

942 Antipode
grounded theory. In other words, we did not set out to study whiteness,
but our analyses emerged from a research process stressing detailed
observations. Additionally, we conceived of and conducted each of
these projects independently. We were later introduced by a common
committee member, and began to share insights. Only then did the idea
of a comparative paper develop.
We spent 18 months as participant observers (the first author in
Berkeley and the second author in Davis). In this capacity, we took
on the roles of customers, volunteers and occasional vendors. Our
observations allowed us to witness and analyze some of the interactions
that comprise farmers markets. More specifically, we listened to the
everyday discourses through which buyers and sellers linked the
practice of food commerce to ethical goals including environmental
sustainability, community building and social justice. During and after
these observations, we took copious notes, which we later expanded.
In addition, each researcher conducted in-depth interviews with
customers, vendors, market managers, and “tourists” (people who go
to the market but do not shop). The first author conducted 18 interviews
and the second author conducted 13.7 All interviews were recorded and
later transcribed. During our interviews, we asked those we interviewed
to discuss the larger social, economic, ethical and political meanings
they assign to farmers markets. In other words, we were interested in
the understandings of social life that would lead participants to buy, sell
and work at a farmers market. The first author also conducted a survey
of 100 market customers, using a sample of convenience.8 This survey
provided not only demographic information but also data on the values
and priorities of a larger swath of market patrons. The second author
gleaned demographic information through repeated racial point counts.9
Both authors then scrutinized our notes and interview transcripts, and
began to code them. This search for patterns from within a wealth of
available data allows the observations and interviews to give rise to
the analysis, and minimizes the risk of researchers merely replicating
their own perspectives (Glaser and Strauss 1967). This grounded theory
approach is particularly appropriate to our research because of our own
positionality within the alternative agrifood movement, in which we’ve
both been active for many years.
Within the movement, we have played a variety of roles, including
farmers market customers, vendors, gardeners, farm apprentices, local
food system analysts and cooks. Each of us has been moved by the
aesthetics of alternative agriculture and inspired by its political potential.
However, we are also among those movement participants who believe
that more needs to be done to attend to issues of social justice. Farmers
markets are spaces in which we see friends and feel included in the
communities in which we live. Nonetheless, we are disturbed by our
belief that these pleasures are, at least in part, tied to our own light
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 943
skins and middle-class upbringings. This paper combines rigorous
research methodology with the insights of insiders in order to explore the
ways that whiteness manifests and is contested in alternative agrifood
systems.
Case Description
We have focused on the following two cases, not because they
are representative of farmers markets nationwide, but because they
closely resemble the imperatives and poetics of the alternative agrifood
movement, and because of their relative influence. Indeed, both markets
have won numerous awards, and market managers share their successes
at conferences around the country. As we will describe below, our
cases emphasize ecological production and community building to a
greater extent than other area markets. Moreover, this kind of market
is not specific to California, but can be found in other affluent, highly
educated areas including Ann Arbor (Michigan), Madison (Wisconsin),
or the Union Square market in Manhattan. The type of farmers market
our cases represent are those that are most explicitly concerned with
justice and sustainability.
Davis
The Davis Farmers Market occurs every Wednesday and Saturday within
the lush green landscape of Davis’s Central Park. At 32 years old, it is
one of the longest-running farmers markets in the country. The Davis
Farmers Market is an important part of the city’s identity. Indeed, the
city’s homepage depicts the farmers market.
Under a towering green pavilion built for the purpose of this popular
market, rest the stands of dozens of organic and conventional produce
and other farm product vendors. Each end of the pavilion hosts additional
activity; the north end is populated by political groups and non-profit
organizations, while the south side features a handful of hot food
vendors. While vendors come from throughout the state, the farmers
market gives priority to local farmers and businesspeople. Much of the
market’s produce comes from the nearby Capay Valley and surrounding
counties, while the prepared foods are provided largely by vendors
located in and around Davis.
People of all ages pack the pavilion, moving in all directions, stopping
to shop at stands, taking advantage of a free sample, or talking with a
run-in acquaintance. In the backdrop of all this hustle and bustle, kids
play on playgrounds and water fountains and adults relax and chat in
the expansive green field adjacent to the market. While Davis is often
described as a college town, farmers market customers consist primarily
of families and older permanent residents. White and Asian American
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

944 Antipode
participants closely represent the town’s respective demographics (70%
and 18% respectively) (US Census Bureau nd), while Latino and
African-American participants are underrepresented. According to the
latest census counts which sum up both student and permanent resident
populations, Davis’ Latino population constitutes 9.6% of the total and
African-Americans are 2.3% of the total (US Census Bureau nd). At the
market, these populations made up 4% and 1.5% respectively.
North Berkeley
Every Thursday evening, a busy North Berkeley street is blocked off
by about 20 tent stalls. A festive spectacle as well as a commercial
venue, tables are artfully arranged with rainbows of brightly colored
produce, bread, fish and sweets. At either end, individuals circulating
petitions stand ready to engage customers as they enter and exit the
market. As in Davis, customers stroll from one artfully decorated booth
to the next, sampling seasonal fruits. Many patrons, especially those with
young children, gather along the grassy, tree-lined median to savor their
purchases. The Ecology Center, which manages the North Berkeley
Farmers Market, mandates that all produce sold there be exclusively
organic and that prepared foods be at least 80% organic. In addition, all
but one vendor—a date farmer from southern California—-come from
within 150 miles of the city.
Located in an area nicknamed the “gourmet ghetto” for its high
concentration of elite eateries, this market serves Berkeley’s most
affluent and predominantly white neighborhood. Indeed, the median
home value, largely unaffected by the current economic upheaval, was
$700,000. The first author’s survey results revealed that market patrons
are 78% white, 48% have at least a bachelors degree and 31% earn
more than $100,000 per year. Local food luminaries such asNY Times
food writer Michael Pollan and celebrity chef Alice Waters have been
spotted wandering through the market’s booths. Waters, whose Chez
Panisse Restaurant lies just a few hundred yards from the market’s
entrance, was among the first gourmet chefs to insist on locally grown
organic ingredients. Chez Panisse, and North Berkeley in general, can be
described as a site at which organic food was transformed from health
food for hippies to gourmet food for elites. Both the counterculture
associated with Berkeley in the 1960s and the upscale nature of the
neighborhood today play important roles in associating the market with
whiteness.
Performances of Whiteness
Production: The White Farm Imaginary
For many customers in the farmers markets we study, the markets are
more than just a place to procure food. Customers are motivated to shop
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 945
at farmers markets by ethical imperatives to “support your local farmer”
or “buy directly from the people who grow our food”. Such phrases are
common not only in the everyday conversations of market shoppers, but
in the work of food writers and celebrity chefs that has made alternative
agriculture so increasingly popular. In this section, we argue that these
common slogans produce what we call a white farm imaginary. This
imagery romanticizes and universalizes an agrarian narrative specific to
whites while masking the contributions and struggles of people of color
in food production (see also Sackman 2005).
The white farm imaginary holds the small-scale, yeoman farmer as
an American agricultural icon. Only whites, however, were historically
able to farm in this way10. This imaginary ignores the justification of
Native American displacement by white homesteaders, the enslavement
of African-Americans, the masses of underpaid Asian immigrants who
worked California’s first factory farms, and the mostly Mexican farm
laborers who harvest the majority of food grown in the USA today
(Allen 2004; Guthman 2008b). Therefore, it is quite possible that the
romantic notions of yeoman farmers and rural culture do not resonate
with many people of color whose collective history recalls the racism
and classism of America’s agricultural past and present. Indeed, Mitchell
(1996) clearly demonstrates that agribusiness has exploited migrant farm
workers while rendering their struggles invisible throughout California’s
agricultural history. This romanticizing of agriculture, we argue, is one
reason that whites are disproportionately drawn to farmers markets that
espouse the alternative agriculture movement’s discourse.
We witnessed this valorization of small farmers constantly throughout
our fieldwork. Farmers were valorized as necessary components of
the community, as stewards of the land, and as keepers of traditional
knowledges, such as seed saving. Most often, farmers were revered for
their hard work. One afternoon in North Berkeley, for example, the
first author overheard the following exchange between a farmer and
customer. The customer had picked out three heads of baby gem lettuce
from among the farmers’ brightly colored choices.
“That’s two,” said the farmer, about to give him a price.
“No, three,” replied the customer.
“Best policy,” the farmer said with a smile.
“No sense gypping you,” exclaimed the customer.11 “You guys are like
the hardest workers.No one works harder than farmers” (emphasis
ours).
A similar example from Davis also valorizes hardworking farmers. One
customer claimed that she bikes 20 minutes to the farmers market, even
in the winter’s pouring rain. When the second author asked why, the
customer answered, “Oh gosh they made the effort to pick this food, I
need to go buy it from them. It must have been miserable for them to
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

946 Antipode
stand there and sell it when it’s so cold.” By asserting the difficulties
of farming and vending, these customers contribute to the imperative
to support small farm owners through the public performance of local,
organic food purchasing.
Customers attend farmers markets not only to financially support
farmers, but to defetishize their relationship to food by establishing
personal connections with, in their own words, “the people who grow
our food”. One regular customer in North Berkeley said that she “comes
to the market because food is so important in my life and I want to
touch the hand of people who grew it”. At the farmers markets we
study, those hands tend to belong to white farm owners and their white
non-farmworker employees. Latino/a farmworkers seldom sell at these
farmers markets, even though they greatly contribute to the growth of the
food sold there. Indeed, despite consumers’ assumptions to the contrary,
many market farms rely heavily on non-family labor.
Because the ideology of farmers markets names them as places where
customers buy directly from growers, the color of faces customers
see at the market influences who they believe grows the food they
buy, and in the case of our markets, confirms the customers’ notion
that sustainable agriculture is done by white family farmers. Indeed,
patrons at each market have often conveyed their mistaken beliefs
that market farms do not employ non-family labor. In the second
author’s experience as a vendor, customers frequently assume that
she is either the farmer or a farm family member. For example, one
customer asked the second author if she was the sister or daughter of
the other vendor (another white non-farmworker employee who bore
no resemblance to the second author). Other white, non-farmer vendors
in Davis have experienced a similar mistaken identity as a farmer or
farm family member. Discovery of the vendor’s non-grower identity
usually happens when a customer inquires about conditions on the
farm or a particular variety and the vendor is unable to answer. When
customers discovered this vendor–grower mismatch, they tended to look
surprised and sometimes disappointed. Their disappointment reflects
the reverence attributed to market farmers, who, because of the history
of Californian agriculture (Mitchell 1996), are disproportionately
white.
Even when customers do meet farm owners, they are far from actually
knowing the people who grow their food. In this way, the white farm
imaginary facilitates a partial defetishization drawn by racial lines and
refetishizes sustainable agricultural production by painting a whitened
picture of who grows food. The abundance of white farmer-farm
operators and their white non-farmworker employees at farmers markets
suggests an image of a white family farmer as the subject of sustainable
agricultural production and fails to paint a more accurate racial portrayal
of those who grow our food. Moreover, by rendering farmworkers
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 947
invisible, the white farm imaginary precludes the alternative agrifoods
movement from envisioning or advocating for more equitable farm labor
relations.
By focusing on and heroicizing farm owners, rather than farmworkers,
the alternative agriculture movement emphasizes and valorizes the
role of whites in the food system rather than people of color. The
invisibility of farmworkers within the prominent alternative agriculture
discourse prevents the movement from addressing structural forces that
shape agricultural possibilities. For example, the white farm imaginary
leads those seeking food system reform to assume that market farmers
hire only relatives, making regulation of employment practices seem
unnecessary.
Consumption: The Community Imaginary
Another reason to support farmers markets, according to the published
poetics of alternative agriculture as well as those we observed, is to
“build community” with both growers and eaters. This narrative depicts
farmers markets as places where customers meet neighbors and share
interests in food and farming, creating a sense of togetherness that many
believe is antithetical to urban anonymity.12 Scholars have argued that
this valorization of community (Slocum 2007) and locality (DuPuis and
Goodman 2005) may embody whiteness and reproduce privilege. The
assumption that positive norms of community overlap with shared space,
Slocum argues, may elide the ways one’s race, class, or gender influence
belonging or allegiance to a specific locality or community. Ignoring
these subjective experiences while assuming natural shared interests of
physical neighbors risks conflating social and spatial relations (Hinrichs
2000) by failing to address race and class divisions that exist within
place-based communities (Slocum 2006). In the following section, we
explore ways that whiteness is embedded in farmers markets’ discourses
and practices of community. Because customers in our market sites
assume the market community to be proxy for the surrounding city
community, the market creates a community imaginary where the
subjects are white, affluent and happy with food system alternatives,
and potentially blinded from seeing food system problems experienced
by others.
In Davis, market patrons consistently define the farmers market as a
symbol of community and families. Indeed, they describe the market as
a place where the Davis community’s identity forms. Market managers’
choices in music and special events, many of which are focused on
children, serve to create this ambiance. Below, one patron describes the
market community:
In a place like Davis you’d expect everybody to be college students and
doing this sorta thing. It’s interesting to find how many older people are
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

948 Antipode
here or in the market. It’s really cool ’cause it feels more community
than college-based. It’s kind of a weird answer but, it really feels more
like a community than a bunch of college students selling, ya know,
co-op stuff.
This quote exemplifies a general sentiment that other interviews showed
as well. In fact, several interviewees explicitly defined the Davis
community as permanent residents and not students. One 10-year
resident of Davis told the second author that she likes its college town
atmosphere, yet she differentiates the students from “folks, the real
people who live in—mostly live in Davis”.
Students, however, comprise half of the town’s Latino/a and African-
American residents and 95% of its Asian Americans. Therefore, to say
that the Davis farmers market community is about families (rather than
students) is to say that it is about whites and not people of color. By
equating the Davis Farmers Market community only with the town’s
predominantly white permanent residents, farmers market customers
symbolically deny many people of color a place in the Davis community.
Moreover, regarding Davis’ community identity as cohering around
the leisurely consumerism of the farmers market suggests that such
whiteness is inseparable from affluence.
Farmers market participants further construct their community as
white by asserting that farmers market demographics are representative
of the town. When the second author asked customers about the lack
of racial diversity at the farmers market, many replied that, “Davis
is pretty white”. When she revealed the town’s actual populations
(according to the 2000 Census) of Latinos (6170) and African-
Americans (1500), most of her interviewees were surprised; they
expected these numbers to be much lower. One interviewee even
disagreed with the census data, saying “I don’t think there’s 900
African Americans in Davis”. By constructing a Davis community that
does not include students, farmers market customers fail to see the
racial diversity that does exist in their town, therefore normalizing the
whiteness of the farmers market. Additionally, while the “town-gown”
divide of most college communities indicates an affluent university in
a working-class town, both authors’ experiences living and working
in Davis reveal that the townspeople, many of whom are university
employees, are much more affluent than the racially diverse student
body.
In North Berkeley, community is often understood and expressed in
terms of a wider countercultural scene that is dominated by whites.13
One regular customer described the community as “hungry people...
and also the soil, the air, the land” necessary to produce the food. This
response resonates with both the counterculture that made Berkeley
famous, and the alternative agriculture movement’s tenet that local food
can help humans reconnect to the natural world (Alkon 2008).14
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 949
Participation in the wider countercultural scene often creates
social connections between managers, vendors and customers. These
individuals have often visited the same places, eaten at the same
(generally expensive) restaurants, volunteered for the same (generally
progressive) organizations and are constantly discovering common
friends and acquaintances. The first author has overheard discussions
between vendors and customers who have run into each other hiking, or
who recognize the places and events depicted on one another’s t-shirts
and canvas shopping bags. This creates a kind of insider ambiance, in
which those who know the wider scene, who tend to be white, feel
welcome while those who do not may feel excluded.
Perhaps the most pervasive example of white affluent culture in this
farmers market is the emphasis on gourmet food. While North Berkeley
can lay particular claim to the association between local/organic and
haute cuisine, this theme is common to many farmers markets. The
North Berkeley Farmers Market emphasizes gourmet food through a
special event calledShopping with the Chef, in which a local chef
leads market patrons around the various farm stands, discussing both
varieties of produce as well as his/her relationship with the farm
owners. Many of the chefs who have participated in this event have
also authored cookbooks. Additionally, Chez Panisse founder Alice
Waters was one of the featured speakers at the market’s 30th anniversary
celebration.
Like many farmers markets, North Berkeley is informally associated
with Slow Foods International, which, according to its website, aims
“to counteract fast food and fast life, the disappearance of local food
traditions and people’s dwindling interest in the food they eat”. During
her observations, the first author often heard one regular customer telling
farmers of her plans to attend the organization’s annual conference in
Italy. Two farm owners attended as well. The following year, many more
attended the Slow Food Nation gathering in San Francisco.
Both Slow Food and Chez Panisse tend to romanticize a European
rural imaginary populated by artisinal producers. Indeed, in her keynote
address to market farmers, as well as patrons who had paid $125 to
attend the market’s anniversary gala, Waters compared the Berkeley
Farmers Market to the street markets in Provence that initially inspired
her California-French Cuisine. Similarly, Marie Sarita Gayt´an’s (2004)
study of northern Californian Slow Food convivia found that the
group puts rural European food culture on a pedestal, rendering it
discursively exclusive to people of color and the urban working class. In
their allusions to European culinary and agricultural superiority, these
institutions serve to strengthen the notion that alternative agriculture and
food, both generally and in North Berkeley, is the province of whites.
Lastly, organic food at the North Berkeley Farmers Market is, on
the whole, more expensive than similar goods purchased nearby, and
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

950 Antipode
certainly more expensive than the processed foods that line the center
aisles of grocery stores (Pollan 2006). Given the strong correlation
that exists between race and income, high cost reinforces the market’s
whiteness.
Rather than acknowledge that high cost makes farmers market
patronage an impossibility for many low-income people, market
participants tend to cast food purchasing decisions as a matter of
individual choice. “We need to rethink the percentage of our budget that
we spend on food”, said one market vendor, evidencing this perspective.
“Only when people are willing to pay for it will our relationship with the
land become more sustainable”. Similarly, Slow Food’s mission, which
works against “people’s dwindling interest” in food, renders invisible
the experiences of those who make food decisions based primarily
on need. The market’s high prices make it more likely that whites,
who tend to be more affluent, will shop there. By positing farmers
market shopping as an ethical imperative, yet not acknowledging the
class exclusivity of this practice, farmers market participants reinforce
what Wacquant (2007) calls the “moral inferiority of the poor” and
by extension, the moral superiority of affluent whites. Furthermore,
this logic ignores the reality that the poor, especially the urban poor,
already spend a greater percentage of their income on food than the
suburban middle class does (Caplovitz 1967; Kaufman et al 1997). In
this way, market participants’ refusal to acknowledge the possibility
of price constraints evidences a worldview in which affluent whiteness
has been universalized, rather than understood as a particular social
location.
In sum, there are a number of ways that we see whiteness working
in these farmers markets. Some are found in the alternative agrifood
movement’s wider philosophy. These include the romantic imagery
surrounding small farmers as well as the imperative to buy directly
from them. The former ignores the role of race in the history of
American agriculture while the latter leads us to believe that the
whites we see selling at the farmers market, rather than their mostly
Latino/a employees, are those who presently grow our food. Farmers
markets such as those we study emphasize the importance of building
community, but are often unaware that they define community in a way
that draws in whites while pushing away people of color. Discourses
that romanticize the European countryside paint alternative agriculture
as a white practice while casting food choice as a moral, rather than
economic, decision normalizes affluence. While the imaginaries that
we describe here refetishize and reimagine a food system that grants
farm owners a better wage, they do not radically reimagine labor
dynamics or food accessibility and affordability. By turning a blind
eye to the social structures that create racial and class inequality,
farmers market participants reify the affluent white imaginaries
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 951
described above, constraining their abilities to contribute to just
sustainability.
Contesting Whiteness
As we have established in the previous section, whiteness pervades
both the Davis and North Berkeley farmers markets. However, many
individuals who work and shop at farmers markets are taking small
discursive actions towards dismantling the influence of whiteness on
alternative agrifood systems.
In each market, the white farm imaginary—-the myth that those
growing market produce are white family farmers—-is disrupted in
a number of ways. Although they are underrepresented, some non-
white farmers and farmworkers are present in each market. In addition,
each market has recently added an organic farm owned and operated
by people of color (making a total of three in Davis and four in
Berkeley).15 In North Berkeley, two of the farmers market managers
and three non-farming vendors16 also identify as people of color. While
we agree with previous research claiming that the presence of people
of color does not necessarily disrupt whiteness (Guthman 2008b), we
also believe that this diversity of bodies encourages market shoppers to
recognize that people of color play important roles in alternative agrifood
systems. Furthermore, one Davis organic farm posts a large photograph
of their “family” farm depicting all of its employees. In this photo,
Latino/a farmworkers outnumber family members two to one, painting
a more racially and economically accurate image of small-scale organic
farms.
The presence of farmers of color allows for the telling of more
culturally specific agrarian stories than the universalist narratives we
deconstructed in the previous section. For example, during herShopping
with the Chef presentation, a white, female chef paused at one farm
stand. There she offered descriptions of the produce interwoven with
stories of the Native American farmer’s childhood. As someone whose
parents migrated seasonally in search of farm labor, this farmer’s
story is quite different from those of the white market farmers, many
of whom came from middle class backgrounds, and were drawn to
farming through their participation in the counterculture. By telling
this particular farmer’s history, the chef contests the pervasiveness of
whiteness in alternative agrifood systems.
Farmers of color can also fulfill the culturally specific foodways
of particular customers. For example, one Chinese American Davis
customer revealed that she goes to the market in part to buy produce
from the Hmong vendors there because they grow varieties of greens
that she likes to eat. If that farmer did not attend the Davis Farmers
Market, the customer told the second, she would have to drive half an
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

952 Antipode
hour to get the same produce. The Davis farmers market allows this
woman to more conveniently eat in what she considers to be culturally
appropriate ways.
Another way that farmers market participants contest the pervasive
whiteness of alternative agriculture systems is by beginning to notice
that it exists. These vendors, managers and customers are, to paraphrase
George Lipsitz, beginning to speak the name of whiteness in a variety
of ways (1998:61). In Davis, white customers have noted that their
farmers market’s special events include a Christmas celebration, but no
festivities for Dia de los Muertos or Chinese New Year. This absence
is particularly striking, customers have told the second author, because
the Mexican and Chinese holidays overlap with the seasonal harvests of
marigolds and mandarins.
Some North Berkeley market managers and vendors acknowledge
the whiteness of their market by educating customers about food
insecurity. One manager, for example, a white man in his mid 20s,
often posts farming facts on a bulletin board alongside the Ecology
Center table. These regularly include statistics concerning race and
food access, and often serve as jumping off points for conversations
about race, class and food. Rather than present a color-blind image of
the food system, this manager initiates conversations that educate an
affluent, white clientele about institutional racism. The above examples
indicate that some farmers market managers, vendors and customers are
beginning to understand, discuss and teach each other about the ways
that whiteness and classism affect both the conventional and alternative
agrifood systems.
While these acts take place largely at the individual level, the markets
themselves are also taking steps to contest whiteness. In Davis, the
farmers market has recently begun hosting a small, weekly market on
campus, targeting students with coupons and promotions. By inviting
students to participate in the farmers market, managers work to create
a more diverse market community. In Berkeley, The Ecology Center
attempts to combat the structural racism that deprives many Black and
Latino/a residents of access to fresh food through a program called Farm
Fresh Choice. Directed by a Black woman and a Latino man, Farm
Fresh Choice hires low-income youth of color to sell farmers market
produce, which they purchase in bulk, in their own neighborhoods. This
program attempts to replace the white farm and community imaginaries
with stories about how organic produce is relevant to low-income
communities of color. Program directors depict the unhealthy food
choices that pervade black and Latino/a communities as a form of
colonialism, against which organic produce becomes a tool for racial
empowerment. Through support for suchfood justiceprograms (Alkon
and Norgaard 2009), farmers markets can become allies to people of
color creating alternatives to agribusiness in their own communities.17
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 953
By increasing access to locally grown organic food, these programs may
shift the material reality of food insecurity.
Some managers, vendors and customers at the Davis and North
Berkeley farmers markets attempt to contest the pervasiveness of
whiteness in alternative agrifood systems. This is accomplished through
the presence of non-white farmers and farmworkers, the telling of
culturally specific agricultural histories and the presence of culturally
specific produce varieties, all of which disrupt the white farm imaginary.
Moreover, some market participants do acknowledge and question the
role of race in both conventional and alternative agrifood systems.
Beyond the individual level, organizations managing these farmers
markets have pursued policies that may alter the power of whiteness in
alternative agrifood systems. During the time of our fieldwork, the most
prominent campaign was to alter the farm bill, replacing agribusiness
subsidies with support for small farmers, ecologically sound production
practices, and anti-hunger programming.18
Toward An Anti-Racist Politics of Food
The alternative agrifood movement is predicated on the idea that
defetishizing food by revealing its social and ecological relations of
production will result in a more just and sustainable food system.
However, much of the movement’s rhetoric and strategy reflects an
affluent, liberal habitus of whiteness that masks and refetishizes the
structural inequalities inherent to both conventional and alternative
agriculture. Such whiteness is constructed through white farm and
community imaginaries that depict the producers and consumers of
local organic produce as ethical without acknowledging their race and
class privilege. Low income people and people of color, on the other
hand, can then be condemned as ignorant of and apathetic towards
their food sources. Conversely, some market participants work to
discursively disrupt this dominant whiteness by critiquing its presumed
universality, and by creating physical and metaphorical spaces to hear
communities of colors’ agricultural and food stories and histories.
Our findings reveal that whiteness must be understood as mutually
constructed through class, extending Patricia Hill Collins’ concept of
intersectionality to apply to privilege as well as oppression. Additionally,
we suggest that both consumption and defetishization, though certainly
not politically transformative themselves, can potentially link farmers
market participants to a broader food politics that is cognizant of both
structural inequality and the need for systemic change.
The whiteness we have observed at the Davis and North Berkeley
farmers markets is inseparable from affluence and liberal political
orientation. This reveals the importance of understanding privilege
through the complex and multi-dimensional lens of intersectionality.
The liberal, affluent habitus of whiteness that colors our cases stands
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

954 Antipode
in contrast to both working-class, conservative variants of whiteness
as well as those of explicitly exclusive groups, suggesting the need
to see race and class as inextricably constructed through one another.
The ability of those we studied to draw on unexamined race and class
privileges to demean low-income people of color while maintaining
a liberal regard for diversity suggests that unpacking the complexities
involved in the creation of privileged subjectivities is a necessary step
toward the creation of just sustainability.
However, even a farmers market that reflects deeply on race and class
privilege may be limited, as many scholars before us have argued, by its
emphasis on a politics of consumption. While it is reasonable to believe
that the movement’s complacency with capitalism and consumerism,
systems that are inherently exploitative and divisive, inhibits its potential
for just sustainability, we do not agree that it is appropriate to dismiss
the farmers market’s potential to inspire social change. After all, farmers
markets are not just consumptive spaces—they are also public spaces
and institutions of the larger alternative agrifood movement. For those
who go to farmers markets, this combination of functions can render
farmers markets entry point into more collective food politics. Both
markets described in this paper already host political activity in which
shoppers learn about and engage in debates around various local,
state and national political politics, and have directly supported several
campaigns aimed at food and agricultural policy.19
Our observations contend not only with the politics of consumption,
but with debates concerning whether defetishizing production–
consumption relations is necessary or sufficient in creating political
change (Cook, Crang and Thorpe 2004; Guthman 2008a, 2008b; Szasz
2007; Magdoff, Foster and Buttel 2000). On one hand, the invisibility
of these social relations is part of what allows labor and environmental
practices to be exploitative (Marx [1867] 1992). However, simply
“removing the veil” that obscures those relationships may not render
them more ethical. For example, in the case of our white farm
imaginary, the presence of Mexican farmworkers at the market will not
automatically cue an anti-racist politics among customers. However, a
greater understanding of how the food system is affected by institutional
racism may provoke the most politicized farmers market supporters
to advocate for immigration and entitlement reform alongside more
progressive agricultural policy. As for less politicized market attendees,
learning about structural inequality may not bring about political
engagement. But neither does it replicate the movement’s colorblind
assumption that if people only knew where their food came from, they
would become supporters of alternative agriculture. What Guthman
(2008b) finds problematic about this refrain is not its educational effort
but its implicit charge to affluent whites to convert low-income people
and people of color to their lifestyles.
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 955
We do not dismiss the educational potential of defetishization, and
are documenting fledgling efforts of whites to teach other whites anti-
racism and to resist white normativity in farmers market settings. We
are also documenting and calling for more inclusion of farmworkers in
farmers market settings—welcoming them to tell their stories and shape
new visions of just sustainability. The farmers market is the public venue
of the alternative food movement. It is there that discourse is constantly
reinscribed and collective strategies are implemented and reimagined.
Discursive disruptions of affluent, liberal whiteness in these spaces may
help to energize and broaden the movement’s collective work. Only then
might meaningful material transformation be possible.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Kimberly Nettles-Barcelon, Ryan Galt and four
anonymous reviewers for providing helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
We also greatly appreciate Carolyn de la Pena and the other members of the UC multi-
campus research group on Food and the Body for providing support and encouragement
for this kind of scholarship. Lastly, we are grateful to the managers, vendors and
customers of the Davis and North Berkeley Farmers Markets who graciously shared
their practices and perspectives with us.
Endnotes
1 We spell farmers markets without the apostrophe to connote that they belong to
all of the managers, customers and vendors who play active roles in their creation
and functioning. Allen (2004) submits that markets’ emphasis on farmers’ economic
success is one reason that social justice priorities are marginalized. Thus, recasting
farmers markets as consisting of farmers, rather than belonging to them, implies that
farmers markets are a public resource rather than the property of the most prominent
vendors.
2 In addition to the scholarly critique of the alternative agrifood’s whiteness, a popular
satirical blog called “Stuff White People Like” lists farmers markets and organic food
in its top 10 (Lander 2008).
3 The concept of habitus comes from Bordieu’s (1977)Outline of a Theory of Practice.
An individual develops a particular habitus—-a set of cultural practices and associated
attitudes—-from their social location, which then provides the skills and dispositions
necessary to navigate a given social field. We found that whiteness, affluence and
political liberalism all contribute to a particular habitus that contributes to comfort
within farmers markets stressing organic and local food.
4 This discourse is sometimes associated with working class people, but is also espoused
by political and business leaders, who have never been working class, in order to create
cultural resonance and support.
5 For academic treatments of working class whiteness, see Frankenberg (1993),
McDermott (2006) or Roediger (1999).
6 We acknowledge that a truly intersectional approach would include an unlimited
number of social categories such as gender, nation, sexuality, etc. Such is the challenge
of translating this complex concept into empirical research. In this study, we deal only
with race and class, but view them as mutually constructed with a variety of social
locations.
7 Most of the second author’s interviews were with customers (10) because of her
initial research focus on consumer motivations. She also did in-depth interviews with
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

956 Antipode
one market manager and two farmers, in addition to hours of informal discussion
with farmers during participant observation. The first author interviewed four market
managers, eight vendors and six customers.
8 A sample of convenience simply indicates that the researcher attempted to stop
shoppers as they passed by her at the market, and surveyed those who agreed to
participate. While these findings are not generalizable in the way a random sample
would be, her demographic data were overwhelming, and fit with her ethnographic
impressions concerning the affluent, white character of the North Berkeley Farmers
Market.
9 A racial point count refers to tallying what the second author perceived to be the
race of customers moving past a fixed point. It should be noted that this method is
flawed because of the researcher’s dependence on her visual impressions to judge
customers’ racial identity, rather than allowing them to identify themselves. The second
author chose this method because of limited time and resources. Because her research
examines the symbolism of racial body clustering, this thumbnail sketch of the market’s
racial demographics is still useful for illustrating the color of bodies that occupy the
market space.
10 This mythical yeoman tradition was never present in California, which has been
dominated by an agribusiness system that exploited migrant farm workers for as long
as there has been white settlement (Daniel 1981; Mitchell 1996).
11 Cultural prohibitions against ethnic slurs are so strong in Berkeley that we suspect
the customer is unaware that gyp is a derogatory insinuation associating Roma peoples,
demeaningly called gypsies, with theft. Ignorance of this term reflects white privilege
and the invisibility of people of color, but not the individual-level racism generally
associated with more common ethnic slurs.
12 Debates concerning the role of community in urban life have been central to the field
of urban sociology, and dominate its foundational works (Park, Burgess, and McKenzie
1925; T¨onnies 1957). The notion that community is antithetical to urban life is widely
available in popular culture (as observed by Lofland 1998; Strauss 1968), and is often
lamented by the popular literature supporting the alternative agriculture movement (for
example, Berry 2002).
13 Of course, not all counterculture is dominated by whites. However, the projects
discussed at this farmers market tend to be.
14 Saldanha’s (2006) work on whiteness, which investigates the expatriate “trance
scene” in Goa, India also posits white viscosity as potentially produced through
counterculture.
15 Some of these farms do not have their certification, presumably because of the
expense, but are considered by market managers to be organic farms. This is also true
of white farms at each market.
16 Non-farming vendors include those selling prepared food as well as fish and honey.
17 Many of these projects, led by black and Latino/a activists, aim to tie alternative
agrifood practices to explicit discourses of racial identity and anti-racism. In practice,
however, many of them rely on the work of white volunteers motivated by the alternative
agriculture movement (Guthman 2008a).
18 Additionally, market managers are open to creating additional strategies to contest
whiteness. For example, after posting earlier versions of this paper on the Community
Food Security listserve, we received many messages from market managers around the
USA who expressed interest in our work.
19 The great popularity and presence of political tabling at the Davis Farmers Market
suggests a great potential for farmers markets to serve as a gateway to food politics that
go beyond consumption. While some of the second author’s interviewees stated that
they avoided the market’s political tables, just as many interviewees claimed that they
visited the political tables during each of their trips to the market. These political tables
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 957
almost never represent groups mobilized around food issues, but the space is available
for that and the general popularity of this space suggests that food-related campaigns
there would garner much support.
References
Agyeman J (2005) Sustainable Communities and the Challenge of Environmental
Justice. New York: New York University Press
Agyeman J and Evans B (2004) “Just sustainability”: The emerging discourse of
environmental justice in Britain.Geographical Journal170(2):155–164
Alkon A H (2008) Paradise or pavement: The social constructions of the environment
in two urban farmers markets and their implications for environmental justice
and sustainability.Local Environment: The Journal of Justice and Sustainability
13(3):271–289
Alkon A H and Norgaard K M (2009) Breaking the food chains: An investigation of
food justice activism.Sociological Inquiry79(3):89–305
Allen P (2004)Together at the Table: Sustainability and Sustenance in the American
Agrifood System. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press
Berry W (2002)The Art of the Commonplace: The Agrarian Essays of Wendell Berry.
Berkeley: Shoemaker & Hoard
Bourdieu P (1977)Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press
Buttel F (1997) Some observations on agro-food change and the future of agricultural
sustainability movements. In D Goodman and M Watts (eds.)Globalising Food:
Agrarian Questions and Global Restructuring(pp 253–268). London: Routledge
Caplovitz D (1967)The Poor Pay More: Consumer Practices of Low-income Families.
New York: Free Press of Glencoe
Collins P H (1990)Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness and the Politics
of Empowerment. Sydney: Allen & Unwin
Cook I, Crang P and Thorpe M (2004) Tropics of consumption: “Getting with the fetish”
of exotic fruit. In A Hughes and S Reimer (eds)Geographies of Commodity Chains
(pp 173–192). NY: Taylor and Francis, Inc
Cronon W (1995) The trouble with wilderness, or, getting back to the wrong nature.
In W Cronon (ed) Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature
(pp 69–90). New York: Norton
Daniel C (1981)Bitter Harvest, A History Of California Farmworkers, 1870–1941.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press
DiChiro G (1995) Nature as community: The convergence of environment and social
justice. In W Cronon (ed)Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature
(pp 298–320). New York: Norton
DuPuis E M and Goodman D (2005) Should we go “home” to eat? Toward a reflexive
politics of localism.Journal of Rural Studies21:359–371
Frankenberg R (1993) White Women, Race Matters: The Social Construction of
Whiteness. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Gayt´an M S (2004) Globalizing resistance: Slow Food and new local imaginaries.Food,
Culture, & Society7(2):97–116
Gilbert L (1988) Exotic produce shouldn’t be a mystery.Supermarket Business43:47–
50
Glaser B and Strauss A (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategy for
Qualitative Research. Hawthorne: Aldine Publishing Company
Goodman M K (2004) Reading fair trade: Political ecological imaginary and the moral
economy of fair trade foods.Political Geography23:891–915
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

958 Antipode
Gottlieb R (2001)Environmentalism Unbound: Exploring New Pathways for Change.
Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press
Gould K, Lewis T L and Timmons Roberts J (2004) Blue-green coalitions: Constraints
and possibilities in a post 9–11 environment.Journal of World Systems Research
X(1):91–118
Guthman J (2008a) Bringing good food to others: Investigating the subjects of alternative
agrifood practices.Cultural Geographies15:425–441
Guthman J (2008b) If they only knew: Colorblindness and universalism in alternative
agrifood institutions.The Professional Geographer60(3):387–397
Guthman J (2008c) Neoliberalism and the making of food politics in California.
Geoforum 39(3):1171–1183
Hartwick E (2000) Towards a geographical politics of consumption.Environment and
Planning A32:1177–1192
Hinrichs C G (2000) Embeddedness and local food systems: Notes on two types of
direct agricultural market.Journal of Rural Studies16(3):295–303
Hughes A (2005) Geographies of exchange and circulation: Alternative trading spaces.
Progress in Human Geography29:496–504
Jones V (2008) The Green Collar Economy: How One Solution Can Fix Our Two
Biggest Problems. New York: Harper Collins
Kaufman P R, MacDonald J M, Lutz S M and Smallwood D M (1997)Do the Poor Pay
More for Food? Item Selection and Price Differences Affect Low-income Household
Food Costs. USDA Agricultural Economics Report No. AER759
Kloppenburg J Jr, Hendrickson J and Stevenson G W (1996) Coming into the foodshed.
Agriculture and Human Values13:33–42
Kobayashi A and Peake L (2000) Racism out of place: Thoughts on whiteness and an
anti-racist geography in the new millennium.Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 90:392–403
Lander C (2008)Stuff White People Like: A Definitive Guide to the Unique Taste of
Millions. New York: Random House
Lipsitz G (1998) The Possessive Investment in Whiteness. Pennsylvania: Temple
University Press
Lofland L H 1998The Public Realm: Quintessential City Life. New York: Aldine De
Gruyter
Lyson T ACivic Agriculture Reconnecting Farm, Food, and Community. Lebanon, NH:
University Press of New England
Magdoff F, Foster J B and Buttel F H (2000)Hungry for Profit: The Agribusiness Threat
to Farmers, Food, and the Environment. New York: Monthly Review Press
Marx K (1867[1992])Capital V ol. 1. New York: Penguin
McDermott M (2006) Working Class White: The Making and Unmaking of Race
Relations. Berkeley: University of California Press
McKibben B (2007) Deep Economy: The Wealth of Communities and the Durable
Future. New York: Times Books
Mitchell D (1996)The Lie of the Land: Migrant Workers and the California Landscape.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press
Nayak A (2006) After race: Ethnography, race and post-race theory.Ethnic and Racial
Studies 29:411–430
Obach B (2004) Labor and the Environmental Movement: The Quest for Common
Ground. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press
Park R, Burgess E and McKenzie R (1925)The City. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press
Payne T (2002) U. S. farmers markets–2000: A study of emerging trends. Washington,
DC: US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Marketing Service
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Whiteness and Farmers Markets 959
P e l l o wDN(2002) Garbage Wars: The Struggle for Environmental Justice in Chicago.
Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press
Pinderhughes R (2003) Poverty and the environment: the urban agriculture connection.
In J K Boyce and B G Shelly (eds)Natural Assets: Democratizing Environmental
Ownership (pp. 299–312) Washington: Island Press
Pinderhughes R (2007) Green collar jobs. http://www.ellabakercenter.org (last accessed
14 July 2009)
Pollan M (2006)The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals.N e w
York: Penguin Press HP
Pulido L (1996)Environmentalism and Economic Justice: Two Chicao Cases from the
Southwest. Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona Press
Roediger D (1999)The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American
Working Class.N e wY o r k :V e r s o
Sackman D (2005)Orange Empire: California and the Fruits of Eden. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press
Saldanha A (2006) Re-ontologizing race.Environment and Planning D Society and
Space 24(1):9–24
Slocum R (2006) Anti-racist practice and the work of community food organizations.
Antipode 38(2):327–349
Slocum R (2007) Whiteness, space and alternative agrifood practice. Geoforum
38(3):520–533
Slocum R (2008) Thinking race through corporeal feminist theory: Divisions and
intimacies at the Minneapolis Farmers’ Market.Social and Cultural Geography
9(8):849–869
Strauss A (1968) The American City: A Sourcebook of Urban Imagery.N e wY o r k :
Aldine
Szasz A (2007) Inverted Quarantine/Imagined Refuge. Minneapolis: University of
Minneapolis Press
Sze J (2006)Noxious New York: The Racial Politics of Urban Health and Environmental
Justice. Boston: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press
Taylor D (2000) The rise of the environmental justice paradigm.American Behavioral
Scientist 43:508–590
T¨onnies A (1957)Community and Society: Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft. Michigan:
MSU Press
US Census Bureau (nd) QuickFacts from the US Census Bureau, http://quickfacts.
census.gov/qfd/states/06/0618100.html (last accessed 2 February 2007)
US Department of Agriculture (2006) USDA farmers markets. http://www.ams.usda.
gov/farmersmarkets (last accessed 13 December 2007)
Wacquant L (2007)Urban Outcasts: A Comparative Sociology of Advanced Marginality.
New York: Polity
C⃝ 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation C⃝ 2010 Editorial Board ofAntipode.
 14678330, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00818.x by University Of Toronto Librarie, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
